---
title: "Book review: Dragon's Egg"
date: 2021-02-18T22:48:31Z
---

I present you a script for a an unfinished short animation about Robert L.
Forward's hard sci-fi book [_Dragon's Egg_][wiki-dragons-egg]. While the script
can be read on its own, the animation will add many details and some
clarification.

---

Some 50 million years ago a supergiant star collapsed. Its unimaginably bright
death roar gave birth to an extraordinary object - a neutron star. An anomaly
set this neutron star on a course towards the Solar system where human
astrophysicists would name it the "Dragon's Egg."

Our brains are not capable of dealing with the extremities on this strange,
20km wide object. The gravitational pull is 67 billion times of the Earth's. A
poppy seed there would weight over 20 tonnes. A cubic centimeter of Dragon's
Egg's magnetic field contains yearly energy output of a nuclear plant[^1]. The
whole star spins five times a second and has a few centimeters thick iron vapor
atmosphere. Underneath the atmosphere is a thin layer of nuclei matter. The
complex interactions in the matter are analogical to our chemistry and
ultimately result in a self-replicating sequence, opening the door for life.

This is the home of cheela, a tribal species evolved from a plant-like
ancestor. Because the interactions between the nuclei tick a million times
faster than the interactions between atoms, cheela live and die on much shorter
time scales. Their day lasts a fifth of a second and an individual cheela lives
about 40 minutes.

Soon after cheela master agriculture, a massive volcano disrupts their farms.
Most clans try to escape by traveling along the magnetic lines. But one clan
sends the fittest scouts across the magnetic lines in the so-called "hard
direction." Over the equator, they discover a garden of eden - rich land free
of poisonous volcano debris. In a leap of abstract thinking a genius cheela
invents arithmetics. She calculates how much rations does the clan need for the
journey and successfully leads the clan to the promise land.

A human expedition visits Dragon's Egg in 2050 when it's close to the solar
system. Scientists launch several objects into the star's orbit, one of them
being a small outpost observatory "Dragon Slayer." From there they control a
beam to study Dragon's Egg's surface. Meanwhile, cheela build a prosperous
empire in the new land. They worship the observatory and consider the beam to
be the kindness of God. An enormous monument is built to praise it.

The monument is an unmistakable proof of intelligence. The human team transmits
pulses down on the star, one pulse a second: one-two-three dot-dash number
series; Dragon's Egg and Dragon Slayer in a 53 by 71 dot-dash pattern; then
basic arithmetics. Cheela soon realise that the messages aren't divine and
Dragon Slayer isn't God. What God would spend a tenth of a cheela life to tell
them that 2 + 2 is 4? Cheela call their correspondents "the Slow ones". They
overcome tremendous obstacles to setup a basic reply device and only after
receiving first cheela signals do the human scientists lear that the organisms
on Dragon's Egg think million times faster.

TODO: human sending library; short friendships, ends by a meet up

In the end, Dragon's Egg is a testament to the human captivation by
extraterrestrial intelligence. And although recent research suggests that the
specific conditions which gave rise to the cheela civilization are unlikely to
be present on the crust of a neutron star[^2], the message of the book rings
strong nonetheless:

<TODO: write down message of the book>

And if we one day establish a communication link with ET, are we going to be
"the Slow ones" to each other?

[^1]: [The Magnetic Field of a Neutron Star,  Michel van Biezen
  ](https://youtube.com/watch?v=AiBJyFY2TQ0)

[^2]: [How Smooth is a Neutron
  Star?,  Mike Merrifield](https://youtube.com/watch?v=YfLvuH41sg8)

<!-- References -->
[wiki-dragons-egg]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dragon%27s_Egg
[light-bend]: https://astrobites.org/2018/11/19/what-does-a-neutron-star-actually-look-like/
